

Chapter 542 — Water Resource Surveys and Projects; Compacts

 


 

 

WATER RESOURCE SURVEYS AND PROJECTS; COMPACTS

 

WATER LAWS

 

SURVEY OF WATER RESOURCES

 

542.010     Contract by Water Resources Commission with federal agencies for investigating and developing water resources; expenses

 

542.020     Purpose of law

 

542.030     Report by commission; contents; copies for public inspection

 

542.040     Withholding water from appropriation pending investigation; restrictions on permit to appropriate; repayment of cost of project

 

542.050     Construction work; minor portions of project

 

542.060     Information on availability of water for beneficial uses; duties of Water Resources Commission; gauging stations; publication of information

 

542.070     Entry on lands

 

542.075     Identification and funding of water projects offering significant public benefit; limitation

 

542.080     Cooperation with federal agencies; contracts

 

542.090     Moneys from licenses under Federal Waterpower Act; disposal

 

542.100     Acceptance and expenditure of gifts and grants for hydrologic investigations; accounting

 

WILLAMETTE RIVER BASIN PROJECT

 

542.110     Public interest requiring construction of system of works

 

ROGUE RIVER WATERSHED PROJECT

 

542.210     Construction of federal dams and structures in Rogue River; limitations

 

OREGON-CALIFORNIA GOOSE LAKE INTERSTATE COMPACT

 

542.510     Oregon-California Goose Lake Interstate Compact ratified; when effective

 

542.520     Oregon-California Goose Lake Interstate Compact

 

COLUMBIA RIVER NATURAL RESOURCES MANAGEMENT COMPACT

 

542.550     Content of Columbia River Natural Resources Management Compact; when effective

 

KLAMATH RIVER BASIN COMPACT

 

542.610     Klamath River Basin Compact ratified; when effective

 

542.620     Klamath River Basin Compact

 

542.630     Water Resources Director to represent state in administering the Klamath River Basin Compact

 

WATERSHED PROTECTION AND FLOOD PREVENTION PROJECTS

 

542.750     Cooperative studies of projects under federal Watershed Protection and Flood Prevention Act

 

SURVEY OF WATER RESOURCES

 

      542.010 Contract by Water Resources Commission with federal agencies for investigating and developing water resources; expenses. In order that the natural resources of Oregon in land, water and power may be utilized to the highest advantage of the people, complete cooperation between the state and federal authorities in controlling, investigating and developing these resources in the interest of the people of the state is essential. Therefore, the Water Resources Commission may, on behalf of this state, enter into a contract or agreement with any federal department or bureau having jurisdiction in such matters for the execution of such surveys and investigations and the preparation of such plans, specifications and estimates or other data by cooperation between the state and the federal department or bureau as will, in the judgment of the Water Resources Commission, approved by the Governor, be best suited to accomplish the purposes of ORS 542.010 to 542.050. However, in no case shall the proportion of expense to be borne by this state exceed the proportion to be borne by the other party to the contract or agreement. [Amended by 1985 c.673 §130]

 

      542.020 Purpose of law. The intent of ORS 542.010 to 542.050, as outlined in ORS 542.010, is to have on file ready and available, such detailed surveys and information as will not only permit, but will tend to induce, the beneficial use of water by private persons, irrigation districts, corporations, or possibly by the state or national government.

 

      542.030 Report by commission; contents; copies for public inspection. As soon as practicable after the completion of the surveys and investigations, the Water Resources Commission shall prepare or have prepared a report setting forth the plans, specifications and estimated cost of construction, maintenance and operation of the projects, together with any other information tending to show their feasibility, and may in the discretion of the commission have the report printed in pamphlet form and distributed to those interested. Copies of completed maps, plans, specifications, estimates and reports secured or prepared in connection with any such investigation shall be kept on file in the Water Resources Department at all times, and open for public inspection during business hours. [Amended by 1985 c.673 §131]

 

      542.040 Withholding water from appropriation pending investigation; restrictions on permit to appropriate; repayment of cost of project. (1) The Water Resources Commission, on behalf of the state, shall withdraw and withhold from appropriation any unappropriated water which may be required for any project under investigation or to be investigated under the provisions of ORS 542.010 to 542.050. If the project is found to be feasible, the commission shall withhold the same from appropriation until the money expended in the investigation of the project is repaid to the cooperating parties in proportion to the amount contributed by each unless funds for construction are provided by one or both of the cooperating parties, in which case the commission shall issue a permit without requiring such repayment. No permit to appropriate water which may be in conflict with any such project under investigation shall be approved by the commission, nor shall any assignment of plans and information or any part thereof be made except upon consideration and order by the commission after full hearing of all interested parties.

      (2) Any moneys returned to the commission under the provisions of this section shall promptly be turned over to the State Treasurer and credited to the General Fund in the State Treasury. [Amended by 1985 c.673 §132]

 

      542.050 Construction work; minor portions of project. As the purposes of ORS 542.010 to 542.050 are to secure the most immediate, as well as the most beneficial, ultimate use of the available waters for any certain project, the Water Resources Commission, as occasion may require, may grant permits and arrange the details so that minor portions of the project may be segregated and constructed at any time. However, the segregation and development of such minor parts shall not interfere to any serious extent with the handling or completion of the balance of the project. [Amended by 1985 c.673 §133]

 

      542.060 Information on availability of water for beneficial uses; duties of Water Resources Commission; gauging stations; publication of information. The Water Resources Commission shall establish gauging stations at suitable points on the various streams of the state to determine the daily and seasonal fluctuations in the flow of the water; shall make surveys and profiles to determine the fall of stream suitable for power development; and shall prepare topographic maps of the territory adjacent to the private streams of the state, so that the availability of water for power, irrigation or other beneficial uses may be determined and made known to the public. All such maps and information shall be made a matter of record in the Water Resources Department and the commission shall publish a summary of all such information in the most practical and economical manner for presentation to the public. The commission shall enter into such agreements and contracts as will insure that the surveys and investigations are carried on in the most economical manner, and that the maps and data are made available to the use of the public as quickly as possible. [Amended by 1985 c.673 §134]

 

      542.070 Entry on lands. In order to carry out the purpose of ORS 542.060 all persons employed under that section may enter and cross all lands within the state; provided, that in so doing, no unnecessary damage is done to private property.

 

      542.075 Identification and funding of water projects offering significant public benefit; limitation. (1) The Water Resources Commission, with the approval of the Governor, may identify proposed or existing water projects which offer significant public benefit, and recommend to the Legislative Assembly funding of those projects in proportion to the public benefits offered by an existing project, or expected to be obtained from a proposed project.

      (2) In order to be eligible for funding under subsection (1) of this section, the Water Resources Commission must identify an existing project within five years after the project first becomes operable. [1981 c.172 §3; 1985 c.673 §135; 1989 c.587 §4]

 

      542.080 Cooperation with federal agencies; contracts. On behalf of this state, the Water Resources Commission may cooperate with the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, the United States Geological Survey, the United States Reclamation Service, or any other federal agency or commission engaged in similar work, and may enter into contracts or agreements whenever it appears desirable or advantageous to the state. [Amended by 1985 c.673 §136]

 

      542.090 Moneys from licenses under Federal Waterpower Act; disposal. Any moneys arising from power licenses under the Federal Waterpower Act, approved June 10, 1920, and paid over to the state, shall be credited by the State Treasurer to the General Fund.

 

      542.100 Acceptance and expenditure of gifts and grants for hydrologic investigations; accounting. The Water Resources Commission may accept and expend moneys from any public or private source, including the federal government, made available for the purpose of conducting hydrologic investigations of Oregon water resources and to assist in carrying out the commission’s functions as provided by law. All moneys received by the commission under this section shall be kept in separate accounts designated according to the purposes for which such moneys were received. The commission shall keep a true and full account of receipts and disbursements under this section. [1965 c.77 §2; 1985 c.673 §137]

 

WILLAMETTE RIVER BASIN PROJECT

 

      542.110 Public interest requiring construction of system of works. (1) It hereby is declared that public interest, welfare, convenience and necessity require the construction of a system of works in accordance with the general comprehensive plan for flood control, navigation and other purposes in the Willamette River Basin, as set forth in House Document 544, Seventy-fifth Congress, third session, and the Act of the Seventy-fifth Congress approved June 28, 1938, 52 Stat. 1222, authorizing the construction of certain public works, including the Willamette River Basin Project.

      (2) The Water Resources Commission may act for the state in all matters necessary or advisable in the promotion, construction and maintenance of the Willamette River Basin Project. [Amended by 1955 c.707 §57]

 

      542.120 [Repealed by 1955 c.707 §75]

 

      542.130 [Repealed by 1955 c.707 §75]

 

      542.140 [Repealed by 1955 c.707 §75]

 

      542.150 [Repealed by 1955 c.707 §75]

 

      542.160 [Repealed by 1955 c.707 §75]

 

ROGUE RIVER WATERSHED PROJECT

 

      542.210 Construction of federal dams and structures in Rogue River; limitations. In order to further necessary investigations and studies for the maximum development of the Rogue River basin and watershed and to conserve established and potential uses thereof, and to facilitate full consideration of various projects to accomplish a coordinated and comprehensive development of the basin and watershed, the United States and its authorized agencies may construct in the Rogue River and on its bed dams and such other structures as the government deems necessary, upon compliance with the laws of Oregon. However, no dam or structure hereby authorized shall be placed in the Rogue River between the intersection of the river with the south line of section 10, township 34 south, range 1 west of the Willamette Meridian in Jackson County, and the confluence of that river with the Pacific Ocean, which would interfere with the free passage of fish up or down stream. No dam or other structure shall be constructed by any person in or on the bed of the Rogue River below its intersection with the south line of section 27, township 33 south, range 1 east of the Willamette Meridian, in Jackson County, except as authorized by this section.

 

      542.310 [Amended by 1953 c.622 §5; repealed by 1955 c.707 §75]

 

      542.320 [Amended by 1953 c.622 §5; repealed by 1955 c.707 §75]

 

      542.330 [Amended by 1953 c.622 §5; repealed by 1955 c.707 §75]

 

      542.340 [1953 c.622 §4; repealed by 1955 c.707 §75]

 

      542.410 [1953 c.431 §1; repealed by 1957 c.142 §5]

 

      542.420 [1953 c.431 §2; repealed by 1957 c.142 §5]

 

      542.430 [1953 c.431 §3; repealed by 1957 c.142 §5]

 

      542.440 [1953 c.431 §4; repealed by 1957 c.142 §5]

 

      542.450 [1953 c.431 §5; repealed by 1957 c.142 §5]

 

      542.460 [1953 c.431 §8; repealed by 1957 c.142 §5]

 

      542.470 [1953 c.431 §7; repealed by 1957 c.142 §5]

 

      542.480 [1953 c.431 §9; repealed by 1957 c.142 §5]

 

      542.490 [1953 c.431 §6; repealed by 1957 c.142 §5]

 

OREGON-CALIFORNIA GOOSE LAKE INTERSTATE COMPACT

 

      542.510 Oregon-California Goose Lake Interstate Compact ratified; when effective. (1) The Legislative Assembly of the State of Oregon hereby ratifies the Oregon-California Goose Lake Interstate Compact as set out in ORS 542.520. The provisions of the compact are declared to be the laws of this state at such time as the compact becomes effective as provided in subsection (2) of this section.

      (2) The compact becomes effective when it has been ratified by the legislatures of the States of Oregon and California and has been consented to by the Congress of the United States as provided in Article VII of the compact. [1963 c.473 §1]

 

      Note: The Oregon-California Goose Lake Interstate Compact became effective on July 2, 1984. The compact was ratified by the State of Oregon by chapter 473, Oregon Laws 1963 (signed by Governor on June 6, 1963). The compact was ratified by the State of California by chapter 1059, California Statutes 1963 (signed by Governor on June 28, 1963). The Congress of the United States consented to the compact by Public Law 98-334, 98th Congress (signed by President on July 2, 1984).

 

      542.520 Oregon-California Goose Lake Interstate Compact. The provisions of the Oregon-California Goose Lake Interstate Compact are as follows:

______________________________________________________________________________

ARTICLE I

PURPOSES

      The major purposes of this compact are:

      A. To facilitate and promote the orderly, integrated and comprehensive development, use, conservation and control of the water resources of Goose Lake Basin.

      B. To further intergovernmental cooperation and comity and to remove the causes of present and future controversies by (1) providing for continued development of the water resources of Goose Lake Basin by the States of California and Oregon, and (2) prohibiting the export of water from Goose Lake Basin without consent of the legislatures of California and Oregon.

ARTICLE II

DEFINITION OF TERMS

      As used in this compact:

      A. “Goose Lake Basin” shall mean the drainage area of Goose Lake within the States of California and Oregon and all closed basins included in the Goose Lake drainage basin as delineated on the official map of the Goose Lake Basin which is attached to and made a part of this compact.

      B. “Person” shall mean the States of Oregon and California, any individual and any other entity, public or private.

      C. “Water,” “waters” or “water resources” shall mean any water appearing on the surface of the ground in streams, lakes, or otherwise, and any water beneath the land surface or beneath the bed of any stream, lake, reservoir or other body of surface water within the boundaries of Goose Lake Basin.

ARTICLE III

DISTRIBUTION AND USE OF WATER

      A. There are hereby recognized vested rights to the use of waters originating in Goose Lake Basin existing as of the effective date of this compact and established under the laws of California and Oregon.

      B. Except as provided in this Article, this compact shall not be construed as affecting or interfering with appropriation under the laws of California and Oregon of unappropriated waters of Goose Lake Basin for use within the basin.

      C. Export of water from Goose Lake Basin for use outside the basin without prior consent of both state legislatures is prohibited.

      D. Each state hereby grants the right for a person to construct and operate facilities for the measurement, diversion, storage and conveyance of water from the Goose Lake Basin in one state for use within the basin in the other state, providing the right to such use is secured by appropriation under the general laws administered by the Water Resources Director of the State of Oregon or the Water Rights Board of California and the laws of the state from which the water is to be taken shall control.

      E. Should any facilities be constructed in one state to implement use of water in the other state, the construction, operation, repairs and replacement of such facilities shall be subject to the laws of the state in which the facilities are constructed.

ARTICLE IV

ADMINISTRATION

      No commission or administrative body is necessary to administer this compact.

ARTICLE V

TERMINATION

      This compact may be terminated at any time by consent of the legislatures of California and Oregon and upon such termination all rights then established hereunder shall continue unimpaired.

ARTICLE VI

GENERAL PROVISIONS

      Nothing in this compact shall be construed to limit, or prevent any state from instituting or maintaining any action or proceeding, legal or equitable, in any court having jurisdiction thereof for the protection of any right under this compact or the enforcement of any of its provisions.

ARTICLE VII

RATIFICATION

      A. This compact shall become operative when ratified by the legislatures of California and Oregon and consented to by the Congress of the United States.

      B. This compact shall remain in full force and effect until amended in the same manner as is required for it to be ratified to become operative or until terminated.

      C. A copy of any proposed amendments to or termination of this compact shall be filed with the Board of Supervisors of Modoc County, California, and the County Court of Lake County, Oregon, at least 30 days prior to any legislative consideration by the legislatures of the States of California and Oregon.

ARTICLE VIII

FEDERAL RIGHTS

      Nothing in this compact shall be deemed:

      A. To impair or affect the existing rights or powers of the United States of America, its agencies, or instrumentalities, in and to the use of the waters of the Goose Lake Basin nor its capacity to acquire rights in and to the use of said waters.

      B. To subject any property of the United States of America, its agencies or instrumentalities to taxation by any state or subdivision thereof, nor to create an obligation on the part of the United States of America, its agencies or instrumentalities by reason of the acquisition, construction or operation of any property or works of whatsoever kind, to make any payments to any state or political subdivision thereof, state agency, municipality or entity, whatsoever in reimbursement for the loss of taxes.

      C. To subject any property of the United States of America, its agencies or instrumentalities, to the laws of any state to any extent other than the extent to which these laws would apply without regard to the compact.

______________________________________________________________________________ [1963 c.473 §2]

 

COLUMBIA RIVER NATURAL

RESOURCES MANAGEMENT COMPACT

 

      542.550 Content of Columbia River Natural Resources Management Compact; when effective. A compact, in form as in this section fully set forth, shall be in effect when the States of Idaho, Montana and Washington become parties thereto, and the consent of Congress has been granted as required by section 10, Article I of the United States Constitution.

______________________________________________________________________________

      The contracting states do hereby agree as follows:

ARTICLE I

      The purposes of this compact, entitled the Columbia River Natural Resources Management Compact, are and shall be to promote the better regional management and coordination of natural resources management issues and other issues pertaining to the governance and use of the Columbia River.

ARTICLE II

      This agreement shall become operative immediately as to those states executing it in the form that is in accordance with the laws of the executing states and the Congress has given its consent.

ARTICLE III

      Each state joining herein shall appoint, as determined by state statutes, six legislators, three from the state Senate and three from the state House of Representatives, to a commission hereby constituted and designated as the Columbia River Governance Commission. Of the members appointed, all may not belong to the same political party. This commission shall be invested with the powers and duties set forth herein.

      The term of each commissioner of the Columbia River Governance Commission shall be four years. A commissioner shall hold office until a successor shall be appointed and qualified but such successor’s term shall expire four years from legal date of expiration of the term of the predecessor. Vacancies occurring in the office of such commissioner from any reason or cause shall be filled for the unexpired term, or a commissioner may be removed from office, as provided by the statutes of the state concerned. Each commissioner may delegate in writing from time to time, to a deputy, the power to be present and participate, including voting as the representative or substitute, at any meeting of or hearing by or other proceeding of the commission.

      Voting powers under this compact shall be limited to one vote for each state regardless of the number of representatives.

ARTICLE IV

      The duty of the Columbia River Governance Commission shall be to assess programs of state and federal agencies responsible for natural resource management issues and governance issues of the Columbia River and to participate in decision-making by federal agencies on issues affecting the use of and activities on the Columbia River. The commission shall have power to recommend the coordination of the exercise of the police powers of the several states within their respective jurisdictions to promote the efficient use and management of the Columbia River and resources related to the Columbia River.

      To that end the commission shall draft and, after consultation with the advisory committee hereinafter authorized, recommend to the Governors and legislative branches of the various signatory states hereto legislation dealing with the governance and management of the Columbia River and the natural resources related to the Columbia River over which the signatory states jointly or separately now have or may hereafter acquire jurisdiction. The commission shall, more than one month prior to any regular meeting of the legislative branch in any state signatory hereto, present to the Governor of such state its recommendations relating to enactments by the legislative branch of that state in furthering the intents and purposes of this compact.

      The commission shall consult with and advise the pertinent administrative agencies in the signatory states of such regulations as it deems advisable with regard to problems connected with the governance and use of the Columbia River and that lie within the jurisdiction of such agencies.

      The commission shall have power to recommend to the federal government and to states signatory hereto management strategies for the natural resources of the Columbia River and any changes to federal or state statutes, regulations or rules necessary to the efficient and sound governance of the Columbia River and its natural resources.

ARTICLE V

      The commission shall elect from its number a chairperson and a vice chairperson and shall appoint and at its pleasure remove or discharge such officers and employees as may be required to carry out the provisions of this compact and shall fix and determine their duties, qualifications and compensation. Said commission shall adopt rules and regulations for the conduct of its business. It may establish and maintain one or more offices for the transaction of its business and may meet at any time or place within the territorial limits of the signatory states but must meet at least once a year.

ARTICLE VI

      No action shall be taken by the commission except by the affirmative vote of a majority of the whole number of compacting states represented at any meeting. No recommendation shall be made by the commission in regard to the management of natural resources related to, or the governance and use of, the Columbia River except by the vote of a majority of the compacting states that have an interest in such issues.

ARTICLE VII

      The natural resource agencies of the signatory states shall act in collaboration as the official research agency of the Columbia River Governance Commission.

      An advisory committee to be representative of such other interests of each state as the commission deems advisable shall be established by the commission as soon as practicable for the purpose of advising the commission upon such recommendations as it may desire to make.

ARTICLE VIII

      Nothing in this compact shall be construed to limit the powers of any state or to repeal or prevent the enactment of any legislation or the enforcement of any requirement by any state imposing additional conditions and restrictions to conserve its natural resources.

ARTICLE IX

      Continued absence of representation or of any representative on the commission from any state party hereto shall be brought to the attention of the Governor thereof.

ARTICLE X

      The states that sign this compact agree to make available annual funds for the support of the commission on the following basis:

      Sixty percent (60%) of the annual budget shall be shared equally by those member states having as a boundary the Columbia River; and forty percent (40%) of the annual budget shall be shared equally by the other member states.

      The annual contribution of each member state shall be figured to the nearest one hundred dollars.

      This article shall become effective upon its enactment by the States of Idaho, Montana, Oregon and Washington and upon ratification by Congress by virtue of the authority vested in it under section 10, Article I of the United States Constitution.

ARTICLE XI

      This compact shall continue in force and remain binding upon each state until renounced by it. Renunciation of this compact must be preceded by sending six months’ written notice of intention to withdraw from the compact to the other parties hereto.

ARTICLE XII

      The State of Nevada or any state having rivers or streams tributary to the Columbia River may become a contracting state by enactment of the Columbia River Natural Resources Management Compact. Upon admission of any new state to the compact, the purposes of the compact and the duties of the commission shall extend to the development of joint programs for the use and governance of the Columbia River and its natural resources in which the contracting states share mutual concerns.

      This article shall become effective upon its enactment by the States of Idaho, Montana, Oregon and Washington and upon ratification by Congress by virtue of the authority vested in it under section 10, Article I of the United States Constitution.

______________________________________________________________________________ [1999 c.540 §1]

 

      Note: 542.550 was enacted into law by the Legislative Assembly but was not added to or made a part of ORS chapter 542 or any series therein by legislative action. See Preface to Oregon Revised Statutes for further explanation.

 

KLAMATH RIVER BASIN COMPACT

 

      542.610 Klamath River Basin Compact ratified; when effective. (1) The Legislative Assembly of the State of Oregon hereby ratifies the Klamath River Basin Compact set forth in ORS 542.620, and the provisions of such compact hereby are declared to be the law of this state upon such compact becoming effective as provided in subsection (2) of this section.

      (2) The compact shall become effective when it has been ratified by the legislatures of the States of California and Oregon, and has been consented to by the Congress of the United States as provided in Article XIII of the compact. [1957 c.142 §1]

 

      Note: The Klamath River Basin Compact became effective on September 11, 1957. The compact was ratified by the State of Oregon by chapter 142, Oregon Laws 1957 (signed by Governor on April 17, 1957). The compact was ratified by the State of California by chapter 113, California Statutes 1957 (signed by Governor on April 17, 1957, and effective on September 11, 1957). The Congress of the United States consented to the compact by Public Law 85-222, 85th Congress (signed by President on August 30, 1957).

 

      542.620 Klamath River Basin Compact. The provisions of the Klamath River Basin Compact are as follows:

______________________________________________________________________________

ARTICLE I

PURPOSES

      The major purposes of this compact are, with respect to the water resources of the Klamath River Basin:

      A. To facilitate and promote the orderly, integrated and comprehensive development, use, conservation and control thereof for various purposes, including, among others: The use of water for domestic purposes; the development of lands by irrigation and other means; the protection and enhancement of fish, wildlife and recreational resources; the use of water for industrial purposes and hydroelectric power production; and the use and control of water for navigation and flood prevention.

      B. To further intergovernmental cooperation and comity with respect to these resources and programs for their use and development and to remove causes of present and future controversies by providing (1) for equitable distribution and use of water among the two states and the Federal Government, (2) for preferential rights to the use of water after the effective date of this compact for the anticipated ultimate requirements for domestic and irrigation purposes in the Upper Klamath River Basin in Oregon and California, and (3) for prescribed relationships between beneficial uses of water as a practicable means of accomplishing such distribution and use.

ARTICLE II

DEFINITION OF TERMS

      As used in this compact:

      A. “Klamath River Basin” shall mean the drainage area of the Klamath River and all its tributaries within the States of California and Oregon and all closed basins included in the Upper Klamath River Basin.

      B. “Upper Klamath River Basin” shall mean the drainage area of the Klamath River and all its tributaries upstream from the boundary between the States of California and Oregon and the closed basins of Butte Valley, Red Rock Valley, Lost River Valley, Swan Lake Valley and Crater Lake, as delineated on the official map of the Upper Klamath River Basin approved on September 6, 1956, by the commissions negotiating this compact and filed with the Secretaries of State of the two states and the General Services Administration of the United States, which map is incorporated by reference and made a part hereof.

      C. “Commission” shall mean the Klamath River Compact Commission as created by Article IX of this compact.

      D. “Klamath Project” of the Bureau of Reclamation of the Department of the Interior of the United States shall mean that area as delineated by appropriate legend on the official map incorporated by reference under subdivision B of this Article.

      E. “Person” shall mean any individual or any other entity, public or private, including either state, but excluding the United States.

      F. “Keno” shall mean a point on the Klamath River at the present needle dam, or any substitute control dam constructed in section 36, township 39 south, range 7 east, Willamette Base and Meridian.

      G. “Water” or “waters” shall mean waters appearing on the surface of the ground in streams, lakes or otherwise, regardless of whether such waters at any time were or will become ground water, but shall not include water extracted from underground sources until after such water is used and becomes surface return flow or waste water.

      H. “Domestic use” shall mean the use of water for human sustenance, sanitation and comfort; for municipal purposes; for livestock watering; for irrigation of family gardens; and for other like purposes.

      I. “Industrial use” shall mean the use of water in manufacturing operations.

      J. “Irrigation use” shall mean the use of water for production of agricultural crops, including grain grown for feeding wildfowl.

ARTICLE III

DISTRIBUTION AND USE OF WATER

      A. There are hereby recognized vested rights to the use of waters originating in the Upper Klamath River Basin validly established and subsisting as of the effective date of this compact under the laws of the state in which the use or diversion is made, including rights to the use of waters for domestic and irrigation uses within the Klamath Project. There are also hereby recognized rights to the use of all waters reasonably required for domestic and irrigation uses which may hereafter be made within the Klamath Project.

      B. Subject to the rights described in subdivision A of this Article and excepting the uses of water set forth in subdivision E of Article XI, rights to the use of unappropriated waters originating within the Upper Klamath River Basin for any beneficial use in the Upper Klamath River Basin, by direct diversion or by storage for later use, may be acquired by any person after the effective date of this compact by appropriation under the laws of the state where the use is to be made, as modified by the following provisions of this subdivision B and subdivision C of this Article, and may not be acquired in any other way:

      1. In granting permits to appropriate waters under this subdivision B, as among conflicting applications to appropriate when there is insufficient water to satisfy all such applications, each state shall give preference to applications for a higher use over applications for a lower use in accordance with the following order of uses:

      (a) Domestic use,

      (b) Irrigation use,

      (c) Recreational use, including use for fish and wildlife,

      (d) Industrial use,

      (e) Generation of hydroelectric power,

      (f) Such other uses as are recognized under the laws of the state involved.

 

These uses are referred to in this compact as uses (a), (b), (c), (d), (e) and (f), respectively. Except as to the superiority of rights to the use of water for use (a) or (b) over the rights to the use of water for use (c), (d), (e) or (f), as governed by subdivision C of this Article, upon a permit being granted and a right becoming vested and perfected by use, priority in right to the use of water shall be governed by priority in time within the entire Upper Klamath River Basin regardless of state boundaries. The date of priority of any right to the use of water appropriated for the purposes above enumerated shall be the date of the filing of the application therefor, but such priority shall be dependent on commencement and completion of construction of the necessary works and application of the water to beneficial use with due diligence and within the times specified under the laws of the state where the use is to be made. Each state shall promptly provide the commission and the appropriate official of the other state with complete information as to such applications and as to all actions taken thereon.

      2. Conditions on the use of water under this subdivision B in Oregon shall be:

      (a) That there shall be no diversion of waters from the Upper Klamath River Basin, but this limitation shall not apply to out-of-basin diversions of waters originating within the drainage area of Fourmile Lake.

      (b) That water diverted from Upper Klamath Lake and the Klamath River and its tributaries upstream from Keno, Oregon, for use in Oregon and not consumed therein and appearing as surface return flow and waste water within the Upper Klamath River Basin shall be returned to the Klamath River or its tributaries above Keno, Oregon.

      3. Conditions on the use of water under this subdivision B in California shall be:

      (a) That the waters diverted from the Klamath River within the Upper Klamath River Basin for use in California shall not be taken outside the Upper Klamath River Basin.

      (b) That substantially all of the return flows and waste water finally resulting from such diversions and use appearing as surface waters in the Upper Klamath River Basin shall be made to drain so as to be eventually returned to the Klamath River upstream from Keno, Oregon.

      C. 1. All rights, acquired by appropriation after the effective date of this compact, to use waters originating within the Upper Klamath River Basin for use (a) or (b) in the Upper Klamath River Basin in either state shall be superior to any rights, acquired after the effective date of this compact, to use such waters (i) for any purpose outside the Klamath River Basin by diversion in California or (ii) for use (c), (d), (e) or (f) anywhere in the Klamath River Basin. Such superior rights shall exist regardless of their priority in time and may be exercised with respect to inferior rights without the payment of compensation. But such superior rights to use water for use (b) in California shall be limited to the quantity of water necessary to irrigate 100,000 acres of land, and in Oregon shall be limited to the quantity of water necessary to irrigate 200,000 acres of land.

      2. The provisions of paragraph 1 of this subdivision C shall not prohibit the acquisition and exercise after the effective date of this compact of rights to store waters originating within the Upper Klamath River Basin and to make later use of such stored water for any purpose, as long as the storing of waters for such later use, while being effected, does not interfere with the direct diversion or storage of such waters for use (a) or (b) in the Upper Klamath River Basin.

ARTICLE IV

HYDROELECTRIC POWER

      It shall be the objective of each state, in the formulation and the execution and the granting of authority for the formulation and execution of plans for the distribution and use of the water of the Klamath River Basin, to provide for the most efficient use of available power head and its economic integration with the distribution of water for other beneficial uses in order to secure the most economical distribution and use of water and lowest power rates which may be reasonable for irrigation and drainage pumping, including pumping from wells.

ARTICLE V

INTERSTATE DIVERSION AND STORAGE RIGHTS; MEASURING DEVICES

      A. Each state hereby grants for the benefit of the other and its designees the right to construct and operate facilities for the measurement, diversion, storage and conveyance of water from the Upper Klamath River Basin in one state for use in the other insofar as the exercise of such right may be necessary to effectuate and comply with the terms of this compact. The location of such facilities shall be subject to approval by the commission.

      B. Each state or its designee, exercising within the jurisdiction of the other a right granted under subdivision A of this Article, shall make provision for the establishment, operation and maintenance of permanent gaging stations at such points on streams or reservoir or conveyance facilities as may be required by the commission for the purpose of ascertaining and recording the volume of diversions by the streams or facilities involved. Said stations shall be equipped with suitable devices for determining the flow of water at all times. All information obtained from such stations shall be compiled in accordance with the standards of the United States Geological Survey, shall be filed with the commission, and shall be available to the public.

ARTICLE VI

ACQUISITION OF PROPERTY FOR STORAGE AND DIVERSION; IN LIEU TAXES

      A. Subject to approval of the commission, either state shall have the right (1) to acquire such property rights in the other state as are necessary for the diversion, storage, conveyance, measurement and use of water in conformity with this compact, by donation or purchase, or (2) to elect to have the other state acquire such property rights for it by purchase or through the exercise of the power of eminent domain. A state making the latter election shall make a written request therefor and the other state shall expeditiously acquire said property rights either by purchase at a price satisfactory to the requesting state, or, if such purchase cannot be made, then through the exercise of its power of eminent domain, and shall convey said property rights to the requesting state or its designee. All costs of such acquisition shall be paid by the requesting state. Neither state shall have any greater power to acquire property rights for the other state through the exercise of the power of eminent domain than it would have under its laws to acquire the same property rights for itself.

      B. Should any diversion, storage or conveyance facilities be constructed or acquired in either state for the benefit of the other state, as herein provided, the construction, repair, replacement, maintenance and operation of such facilities shall be subject to the laws of the state in which the facilities are located, except that the proper officials of that state shall permit the storage, release and conveyance of any water to which the other state is entitled under this compact.

      C. Either state having property rights other than water rights in the other state acquired as provided in this Article shall pay to each political subdivision of the state in which such property rights are located, each and every year during which such rights are held, a sum of money equivalent to the average annual amount of taxes assessed against those rights during the 10 years preceding the acquisition of such rights in reimbursement for the loss of taxes to such political subdivisions of the state. Payments so made to a political subdivision shall be in lieu of any and all taxes by that subdivision on the property rights for which the payments are made.

ARTICLE VII

POLLUTION CONTROL

      A. The states recognize that the growth of population and the economy of the Upper Klamath River Basin can result in pollution of the waters of the Upper Klamath River Basin constituting a menace to the health and welfare of, and occasioning economic loss to, people living or having interests in the Klamath River Basin. The states recognize further that protection of the beneficial uses of the waters of the Klamath River Basin requires cooperative action of the two states in pollution abatement and control.

      B. To aid in such pollution abatement and control, the commission shall have the duty and power:

      1. To cooperate with the states or agencies thereof or other entities and with the United States for the purpose of promoting effective laws and the adoption of effective regulations for abatement and control of pollution of the waters of the Klamath River Basin, and from time to time to recommend to the governments reasonable minimum standards for the quality of such waters.

      2. To disseminate to the public by any and all appropriate means information respecting pollution abatement and control in the waters of the Klamath River Basin and on the harmful and uneconomic results of such pollution.

      C. Each state shall have the primary obligation to take appropriate action under its own laws to abate and control interstate pollution, which is defined as the deterioration of the quality of the waters of the Upper Klamath River Basin within the boundaries of such state which materially and adversely affects beneficial uses of waters of the Klamath River Basin in the other state. Upon complaint to the commission by the state water pollution control agency of one state that interstate pollution originating in the other state is not being prevented or abated, the procedure shall be as follows:

      1. The commission shall make an investigation and hold a conference on the alleged interstate pollution with the water pollution control agencies of the two states, after which the commission shall recommend appropriate corrective action.

      2. If appropriate corrective action is not taken within a reasonable time, the commission shall call a hearing, giving reasonable notice in writing thereof to the water pollution control agencies of the two states and to the person or persons which it is believed are causing the alleged interstate pollution. Such hearing shall be held in accordance with rules and regulations of the commission, which shall conform as nearly as practicable with the laws of the two states governing administrative hearings. At the conclusion of such hearing, the commission shall make a finding as to whether interstate pollution exists, and if so, shall issue to any person or persons which the commission finds are causing such interstate pollution an order or orders for correction thereof.

      3. It shall be the duty of the person against whom any such order is issued to comply therewith. Any court of general jurisdiction of the state where such discharge is occurring or the United States District Court for the district where the discharge is occurring shall have jurisdiction, on petition of the commission for enforcement of such order, to compel action by mandamus, injunction, specific performance, or any other appropriate remedy, or on petition of the person against whom the order is issued to review any order. At the conclusion of such enforcement or review proceedings, the court may enter such decree or judgment affirming, reversing, modifying, or remanding such order as in its judgment is proper in the circumstances on the basis of the rules customarily applicable in proceedings for court enforcement or review of administrative actions.

      D. The water pollution control agencies of the two states shall, from time to time, make available to the commission all data relating to the quality of the waters of the Upper Klamath River Basin which they possess as the result of studies, surveys and investigations thereof which they may have made.

ARTICLE VIII

MISCELLANEOUS

      A. Subject to vested rights as of the effective date of this compact, there shall be no diversion of waters from the basin of Jenny Creek to the extent that such waters are required, as determined by the commission, for use on land within the basin of Jenny Creek.

      B. Each state shall exercise whatever administrative, judicial, legislative or police powers it has that are required to provide any necessary reregulation or other control over the flow of the Klamath River downstream from any hydroelectric power plant for protection of fish, human life or property from damage caused by fluctuations resulting from the operation of such plant.

ARTICLE IX

ADMINISTRATION

      A. 1. There is hereby created a commission to administer this compact. The commission shall consist of three members. The representative of the State of California shall be the Department of Water Resources. The representative of the State of Oregon shall be the Water Resources Commission of Oregon who shall serve as ex officio representative of the Water Resources Commission of Oregon. The President is requested to appoint a federal representative who shall be designated and shall serve as provided by the laws of the United States.

      2. The representative of each state shall be entitled to one vote in the commission. The representative of the United States shall serve as chairman of the commission without vote. The compensation and expenses of each representative shall be fixed and paid by the government which he represents. Any action by the commission shall be effective only if it be agreed to by both voting members.

      3. The commission shall meet to establish its formal organization within 60 days after the effective date of this compact, such meeting to be at the call of the Governors of the two states. The commission shall then adopt its initial set of rules and regulations governing the management of its internal affairs providing for, among other things, the calling and holding of meetings, the adoption of a seal, and the authority and duties of the chairman and executive director. The commission shall establish its office within the Upper Klamath River Basin.

      4. The commission shall appoint an executive director, who shall also act as secretary, to serve at the pleasure of the commission and at such compensation, under such terms and conditions and performing such duties as it may fix. The executive director shall be the custodian of the records of the commission with authority to affix the commission’s official seal, and to attest to and certify such records or copies thereof. The commission, without regard to the provisions of the civil service laws of either state, may appoint and discharge such consulting, clerical and other personnel as may be necessary for the performance of the commission’s functions, may define their duties, and may fix and pay their compensation. The commission may require the executive director and any of its employees to post official bonds, and the cost thereof shall be paid by the commission.

      5. All records, files and documents of the commission shall be open for public inspection at its office during established office hours.

      6. No member, officer or employee of the commission shall be liable for injury or damage resulting from (a) action taken by such member, officer or employee in good faith and without malice under the apparent authority of this compact, even though such action is later judicially determined to be unauthorized, or (b) the negligent or wrongful act or omission of any other person, employed by the commission and serving under such officer, member or employee, unless such member, officer or employee either failed to exercise due care in the selection, appointment or supervision of such other person, or failed to take all available action to suspend or discharge such other person after knowledge or notice that such other person was inefficient or incompetent to perform the work for which he was employed. No suit may be instituted against a member, officer or employee of the commission for damages alleged to have resulted from the negligent or wrongful act or omission of such member, officer or employee or a subordinate thereof occurring during the performance of his official duties unless, within 90 days after occurrence of the incident, a verified claim for damages is presented in writing and filed with such member, officer or employee and with the commission. In the event of a suit for damages against any member, officer or employee of the commission on account of any act or omission in the performance of his or his subordinates’ official duties, the commission shall arrange for the defense of such suit and may pay all expenses therefor on behalf of such member, officer or employee. The commission may at its expense insure its members, officers and employees against liability resulting from their acts or omissions in the performance of their official duties. Nothing in this paragraph shall be construed as imposing any liability upon any member, officer or employee of the commission that he would otherwise not have.

      7. The commission may incur obligations and pay expenses which are necessary for the performance of its functions. But it shall not pledge the credit of any government except by and with the authority of the legislative body thereof given pursuant to and in keeping with the constitution of such government, nor shall the commission incur any obligations prior to the availability of funds adequate to meet them.

      8. The commission may:

      (a) Borrow, accept or contract for the services of personnel from any government or agency thereof, from any intergovernmental agency, or from any other entity.

      (b) Accept for any of its purposes and functions under this compact any and all donations, gifts, grants of money, equipment, supplies, materials and services from any government or agency thereof or intergovernmental agency or from any other entity.

      (c) Acquire, hold and dispose of real and personal property as may be necessary in the performance of its functions.

      (d) Make such studies, surveys and investigations as are necessary in carrying out the provisions of this compact.

      9. All meetings of the commission for the consideration of and action on any matters coming before the commission, except matters involving the management of internal affairs of the commission and its staff, shall be open to the public. Matters coming within the exception of this paragraph may be considered and acted upon by the commission in executive sessions under such rules and regulations as may be established therefor.

      10. In the case of the failure of the two voting members of the commission to agree on any matter relating to the administration of this compact as provided in paragraph 2 of this subdivision A, the representative from each state shall appoint one person and the two appointed persons shall appoint a third person. The three appointees shall sit as an arbitration forum. The terms of appointment and the compensation of the members of the arbitration forum shall be fixed by the commission. Matters on which the two voting members of the commission have failed to agree shall be decided by a majority vote of the members of the arbitration forum. Each state obligates itself to abide by the decision of the arbitration forum, subject, however, to the right of each state to have the decision reviewed by a court of competent jurisdiction.

      11. The commission shall have the right of access, through its authorized representatives, to all properties in the Klamath River Basin whenever necessary for the purpose of administration of this compact. The commission may obtain a court order to enforce its right of access.

      B. 1. The commission shall submit to the Governor or designated officer of each state a budget of its estimated expenditures for such period and at such times as may be required by the laws of that state for presentation to the legislature thereof. Each state pledges itself to appropriate and pay over to the commission one-half of the amount required to finance the commission’s estimated expenditures as set forth in each of its budgets, and pledges further that concurrently with approval of this compact by its legislature the sum of not less than $12,000 will be appropriated by it to be paid over to the commission at its first meeting for use in financing the commission’s functions until the commission can prepare its first budget and receive its first appropriation thereunder from the states.

      2. The commission shall keep accurate accounts of all receipts and disbursements, which shall be audited yearly by a certified public accountant, and the report of the audit shall be made a part of its annual report. The accounts of the commission shall be open for public inspection during established office hours.

      3. The commission shall make and transmit to the legislature and Governor of each state and to the President of the United States an annual report covering the finances and activities of the commission and embodying such plans, recommendations and findings as may have been adopted by the commission.

      C. 1. The commission shall have the power to adopt, and to amend or repeal, such rules and regulations to effectuate the purposes of this compact as in its judgment may be appropriate.

      2. Except as to matters involving exclusively the management of the internal affairs of the commission and its staff or involving emergency matters, prior to the adoption, amendment or repeal of any rule or regulation the commission shall hold a hearing at which any interested person shall have the opportunity to present his views on the proposed action in writing, with or without the opportunity to present the same orally. The commission shall give adequate advance notice in a reasonable manner of the time, place and subject of such hearings.

      3. Emergency rules and regulations may be adopted without a prior hearing, but in such case they may be effective for not longer than 90 days.

      4. The commission shall publish its rules and regulations in convenient form.

ARTICLE X

STATUS OF INDIAN RIGHTS

      A. Nothing in this compact shall be deemed:

      1. To affect adversely the present rights of any individual Indian, tribe, band or community of Indians to the use of the waters of the Klamath River Basin for irrigation.

      2. To deprive any individual Indian, tribe, band or community of Indians of any rights, privileges, or immunities afforded under federal treaty, agreement or statute.

      3. To affect the obligations of the United States of America to the Indians, tribes, bands or communities of Indians, and their reservations.

      4. To alter, amend or repeal any of the provisions of the Act of August 13, 1954, (68 Stat. 718) as it may be amended.

      B. Lands within the Klamath Indian Reservation which are brought under irrigation after the effective date of this compact, whether before or after section 14 of said Act of August 13, 1954, becomes fully operative, shall be taken into account in determining whether the 200,000 acre limitation provided in paragraph 1 of subdivision C of Article III has been reached.

ARTICLE XI

FEDERAL RIGHTS

      Nothing in this compact shall be deemed:

      A. To impair or affect any rights, powers or jurisdiction of the United States, its agencies or those acting by or under its authority, in, over and to the waters of the Klamath River Basin, nor to impair or affect the capacity of the United States, its agencies or those acting by or under its authority in any manner whatsoever, except as otherwise provided by the federal legislation enacted for the implementation of this compact as specified in Article XIII.

      B. To subject any property of the United States, its agencies or instrumentalities, to taxation by either state or any subdivision thereof, unless otherwise provided by Act of Congress.

      C. To subject any works or property of the United States, its agencies, instrumentalities or those acting by or under its authority, used in connection with the control or use of waters which are the subject of this compact, to the laws of any state to an extent other than the extent to which those laws would apply without regard to this compact, except as otherwise provided by the federal legislation enacted for the implementation of this compact as specified in Article XIII.

      D. To affect adversely the existing areas of Crater Lake National Park or Lava Beds National Monument, or to limit the operation of laws relating to the preservation thereof.

      E. To apply to the use of water for the maintenance, on the scale at which such land and water areas are maintained as of the effective date of this compact, of officially designated waterfowl management areas, including water consumed by evaporation and transpiration on water surface areas and water used for irrigation or otherwise in the Upper Klamath River Basin; nor to affect the rights and obligations of the United States under any migratory bird treaty or the Migratory Bird Conservation Act (45 Stat. 1222), as amended to the effective date of this compact.

ARTICLE XII

GENERAL PROVISIONS

      A. Each state and all persons using, claiming or in any manner asserting any right to the use of the waters of the Klamath River Basin under the authority of either state shall be subject to the terms of this compact.

      B. Nothing in this compact shall be construed to limit or prevent either state from instituting or maintaining any action or proceeding, legal or equitable, in any court of competent jurisdiction for the protection of any right under this compact or the enforcement of any of its provisions.

      C. Should a court of competent jurisdiction hold any part of this compact to be contrary to the Constitution of either state or the United States, all other provisions shall continue in full force and effect, unless it is authoritatively and finally determined judicially that the remaining provisions cannot operate for the purposes, or substantially in the manner, intended by the states independently of the portions declared unconstitutional or invalid.

      D. Except as to matters requiring the exercise of discretion by the commission, the provisions of this compact shall be self-executing and shall by operation of law be conditions of the various state permits, licenses or other authorizations relating to the waters of the Klamath River Basin issued after the effective date of this compact.

      E. The physical and other conditions peculiar to the Klamath River Basin constitute the basis for this compact, and neither of the states hereby, nor the Congress of the United States by its consent, considers that this compact establishes any general principle or precedent with respect to any other interstate stream.

ARTICLE XIII

RATIFICATION

      A. This compact shall become effective when ratified by the legislature of each signatory state, and when consented to by an Act of Congress of the United States which will, in substance, meet the provisions hereinafter set forth in this Article.

      B. The Act of Congress referred to in subdivision A of this Article shall provide that the United States or any agency thereof, and any entity acting under any license or other authority granted under the laws of the United States (referred to in this Article as “the United States”), in connection with developments undertaken after the effective date of this compact pursuant to laws of the United States, shall comply with the following requirements:

      1. The United States shall recognize and be bound by the provisions of subdivision A of Article III.

      2. The United States shall not, without payment of just compensation, impair any rights to the use of water for use (a) or (b) within the Upper Klamath River Basin by the exercise of any powers or rights to use or control water (i) for any purpose whatsoever outside the Klamath River Basin by diversions in California or (ii) for any purpose whatsoever within the Klamath River Basin other than use (a) or (b). But the exercise of powers and rights by the United States shall be limited under this paragraph 2 only as against rights to the use of water for use (a) or (b) within the Upper Klamath River Basin which are acquired as provided in subdivision B of Article III after the effective date of this compact, but only to the extent that annual depletions in the flow of the Klamath River at Keno resulting from the exercise of such rights to use water for uses (a) and (b) do not exceed 340,000 acre-feet in any one calendar year.

      3. The United States shall be subject to the limitation on diversions of waters from the basin of Jenny Creek as provided in subdivision A of Article VIII.

      4. The United States shall be governed by all the limitations and provisions of paragraph 2 and subparagraph (a) of paragraph 3 of subdivision B of Article III.

      5. The United States, with respect to any irrigation or reclamation development undertaken by the United States in the Upper Klamath River Basin in California, shall provide that substantially all of the return flows and waste water finally resulting from such diversions and use appearing as surface waters in the Upper Klamath River Basin shall be made to drain so as to be eventually returned to the Klamath River upstream from Keno, unless the Secretary of the Interior shall determine that compliance with this requirement would render it less feasible than under an alternate plan of development, in which event such return flows and waste waters shall be returned to the Klamath River at a point above Copco Lake.

      C. Upon enactment of the Act of Congress referred to in subdivision A of this Article and so long as such Act shall be in effect, the United States, when exercising rights to use water pursuant to state law, shall be entitled to all of the same privileges and benefits of this compact as any person exercising similar rights.

      D. Such Act of Congress shall not be construed as relieving the United States of any requirement of compliance with state law which may be provided by other federal statutes.

ARTICLE XIV

TERMINATION

      This compact may be terminated at any time by legislative consent of both states, but despite such termination, all rights then established hereunder or recognized hereby shall continue to be recognized as valid by the states.

______________________________________________________________________________ [1957 c.142 §2]

 

      542.630 Water Resources Director to represent state in administering the Klamath River Basin Compact. The Water Resources Director shall be the only representative of this state in administering the Klamath River Basin Compact set forth in ORS 542.620. The director shall receive no additional compensation for services as such representative, but, subject to any other applicable law regulating mileage and traveling and other expenses for state officers, shall receive actual and necessary traveling and other expenses incurred in the performance of official functions as such representative, to be paid in the same manner and out of the same moneys as other similar expenses of the director are paid. [1957 c.142 §3]

 

      542.710 [Formerly 184.460; 2009 c.762 §85; repealed by 2015 c.767 §4]

 

      542.720 [Formerly 184.470; repealed by 2015 c.767 §4]

 

WATERSHED PROTECTION AND FLOOD PREVENTION PROJECTS

 

      542.750 Cooperative studies of projects under federal Watershed Protection and Flood Prevention Act. (1) The Water Resources Commission may make surveys and investigations and prepare plans, specifications, estimates and other data, as in the commission’s judgment can accomplish the purposes of the Watershed Protection and Flood Prevention Act. As soon as practicable after completion the commission shall prepare, or have prepared, a report setting forth the results of the surveys and investigations. All work performed by the commission under this section shall be correlated with that performed by the United States Natural Resources Conservation Service, or its successor agency, under the Watershed Protection and Flood Prevention Act.

      (2) The commission, on behalf of the State of Oregon, may enter into contracts or agreements with any agencies of the United States Department of Agriculture for the execution of surveys and investigations and the preparation of plans, specifications and estimates or other data to determine costs and feasibility of reservoir or other works of improvement that may be constructed under the provisions of the Watershed Protection and Flood Prevention Act, as amended.

      (3) The intent of this section is to expedite the investigation and planning of works of improvement that may be constructed under the Watershed Protection and Flood Prevention Act to reduce the delay in time occurring between initiation of a project and beginning of construction. [1961 c.617 §§1,2; 1965 c.95 §1; 1985 c.673 §138; 1997 c.249 §181; 2003 c.14 §347]

_______________

 
